Dear Dr. Fortino,

To speed up the review procedure, I decided to thoroughly read your revised
manuscript instead of sending it out to reviewers for a second round.
Attached please, find your MS in which I suggest several changes using the
„Track changes“ option.

The revision improved your MS a lot. You succesfully de-emphasized climate
change in the Introduction as suggested by Reviewer D and myself. Yet, the
climate change case study occupies a significant portion of your MS. In
addition to my comments in the MS, I would like to systematically summarize
the weaknesses of your modelling effort.

(i)     In 2007, Kd was not related to DOC. I accept your argument about the
somewhat isolated nature of this situation. Nevertheless, it remains a bit
irritating that you model Kd from DOC.

(ii)    Next, it turns out that you have a single unpublished DOC value from
the modeled lake measured in 2009. How do we know that 2009 was a normal
year or „another isolated case“?

(iii)   One of the independent variables of multiple regression modeling
thermocline depth (TD) was Julian day. Indeed, Figure 8 convincingly
demonstrated that the time elapsed from the onset of stratification strongly
determined TD. However, warming (particularly by 6ºC) will significantly
shift the onset of stratification. You cannot avoid to model the timing of
stratification and replace Julian days with days of stratification.

(iv)    You do not consider that warming would change the thermal structure
and likely the productivity of your lake, and this may alter the current
relationship found between Kd and TD. (By the way, a log(Kd) vs. log(TD)
regression results in higher coefficient of determination in each year than
the Kd vs. TD regression you use.)

(v)     Whole-lake oxygen consumption of sediments is decisively determined by
gas exchange at the atmosphere/water interface, transport within the water,
balance of photosynthesis/respiration in the water, benthic photosynthesis
and DO flux at the sediment/water interface. These dynamically changing,
complex interactions cannot be modeled on the basis of simple laboratory
experiments. To specify some of the drawbacks of your approach: (1)
Temperature dependence of O2 dissolution in water has not been considered.
In a warmer epilimnion, saturating DO concentration will be lower. Provided
that primary productivity remains unchanged, this will diminish the
difference between the epilimnetic and hypolimnetic DO concentration. If
productivity increases, the difference may also increase. (I maintain my
comment in the MS that your experiment on sediment DO uptake kinetics is not
fully conclusive.) (2) The oxygen flux from the water into epilimnetic
sediments may greatly be enhanced by turbulent diffusion compared to the
water-sediment DO flux in the less turbulent hypolimnion. Therefore the
relationship between areal SOD and TD would be highly non-linear. In your
model, the only non-linear term arises from the hypsographic curve (sediment
area above and below the thermocline).

(vi)    You estimated only a 5% increase in whole-lake SOD at warming by 6ºC.
This is a minor change, which, consdering all the model uncertainties and
limitations in data availability, cannot be taken as significantly different
from zero. At the same time, warming by as much as 6ºC would radically
change both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems of Arctic Alaska. I do not
know, how SOD will change but I would expect a dramatic change, not just 5%.

What can be a solution?

Option 1 (recommended):
Estimate the present whole-lake SOD as you do it now.
Thoroughly discuss each model assumption and simplification.
At the end of the Discussion, start a sub-section where you briefly and
qualitatively highlight the relevance of your findings for climate change.
Present Figure 9 might be replaced by a conceptual figure supporting your
climate change model.

This option would stregthen the present paper and when you have more data
and make your model suitable for prediction, you may write a paper focusing
on climate change issues.

Option 2:
Make the obligatory modifications to the present model (e.g. replace Julian
day with days of stratification).
Thoroughly discuss each model assumption and simplification.

I am afraid that after systematically reconsidering the uncertainties of
your model, you will agree with my conclusions in (vi).

Please, resubmit your paper when you finished this second revision.

Sincerely yours,

Vera Istvanovics
________________________________________________________________________
Inland Waters
https://www.fba.org.uk/journals/index.php/IW

The Ferry Landing, Far Sawrey, Ambleside, Cumbria, LA22 0LP, United Kingdom
Tel. +44 (0)1539 442468   Fax. +44 (0)1539 446914   Email. info@fba.org.uk
Website. www.fba.org.uk      Acting Director: John Davy-Bowker
Registered Charity No. 214440   Company Limited by Guarantee No. 263162, England  UKPRN No. 10018314, VAT No. GB 153895238
